Hi, I'm Noah Gans, I'm a Professor
in the Department of Operations,
Information and
Decisions at the Wharton School.
I'll be your guide for week four of our,
Operations Analytics course.
Before we get started though, I wanted to
remind you of where we are in the course.
In week one,
Sentil introduced you to the news
vendor problem, which is a fundamental
operations problem of matching your
supply with uncertain future demand.
Sentil also offered you
a look at the first steps
of the business analytic cycle.
The problem of characterizing
data with descriptive analytics.
Then in weeks two and three,
Sergei introduced predictive and
prescriptive tools, that are helpful
when deciding the best course of action
when faced with uncertainty.
In week two, you saw how you can use
optimization methods to find the best
course of action, when there's little
uncertainty regarding the data.
In week three, you then saw how
you can use simulation to evaluate
any single course of action, when you're
faced with more significant uncertainty.
And along the way,
Sergei introduced you to production and
distribution problems,
often faced in operations.
Because of their complexity,
Sergei introduced optimization and
simulation one at a time.
Sometimes though you need to optimize in
settings with significant uncertainty.
This is often called decision
making under uncertainty.
And that's where we pick up in week four.
In session one, we'll begin by introducing
a new tool that provides a useful way to
think about and
evaluate decisions made under uncertainty.
They're called decision trees.
Then in sessions two and three, we'll
look at how simulation, optimization, and
decision trees can be used together,
to solve more complex problems of
decision making under uncertainty.
To keep the sessions focused on how
the tools can complement each other,
we'll use the same example
in sessions one to three.
That of a Scandinavian furniture
retailer that we call IDEA.
Finally, in session four.
We'll go back to the news vendor problem,
Sentil introduced in week one.
And we'll see that we can
use the simulation and
optimization framework we've
developed to tackle the problem.
That's our agenda for the week.
In session one, we'll introduce decision
trees, and we'll introduce them through
the example of IDEA,
a Scandinavian furniture retailer.
IDEA plans to introduce a gazebo
tent that it calls, Krusbar.
The tent's to be sold next
summer in Scandinavia, for
a price that's about 150 euros.
It will be manufactured in advance,
next spring and summer.
At that 150 euro price, there's
uncertainty regarding the demand for
Krusbar though.
There's a 50 50 chance that
sales will be weak or strong.
If sales are strong,
IDEA will be able to sell 10,000 units.
If sales are weak, IDEA will only
be able to sell 5,000 units.
This demand distribution is quite simple.
It only has two points,
5,000 units of demand or 10,000 units.
But that simplicity let's
us focus on the analysis.
We'll consider more complex demand
distributions later this week.
IDEAs considering two potential
suppliers to manufacture the Krusbar.
One's in Sweden, and
the other is in Poland.
We'll call the Swedish supplier, supplier
S and the Polish supplier, supplier P.
Each of the suppliers requires that
IDEA uses all of its capacity.
And IDEA will contract with at
most one of the two suppliers.
That is, IDEA may decide to use
supplier S, or to use supplier P,
or IDEA may decide not to use a supplier
at all and not sell the Krusbar tent.
Here are the statistics for
the two suppliers.
They have different capacities.
You can see that supplier S has
5,000 units of capacity, and
if IDEA contracts with it,
it will order 5,000 units of the tent.
Supplier P has 10,000 units of capacit,
and
if IDEAs contracts with it,
it will order 10,000 units of the tent.
The two suppliers also have
different up-front charges to IDEA.
If IDEA contracts with supplier
S there is no up-front charge.
Where as, if IDEA contracts with Supplier
P, there's a 50,000 euro upfront charge.
Unit costs are also different.
You can see that Supplier S has a unit
cost to IDEA of 120 euros per tent.
Whereas Supplier P, has a unit
cost of a hundred euros per tent.
So, we can compare Supplier S
has no upfront charge, but
it has a higher unit cost,
whereas Supplier P has an upfront charge,
but it has a lower unit cost.
We can use a decision tree
to represent IDEA's choices.
Before I get in to it,
I wanna just review quickly for
you, what the elements
are of a decision tree.
The structures of a decision trees
made up of three building blocks.
They're decision nodes,
which we'll represent with squares.
Decision nodes are points at which a
decision maker has to decide on an action.
For IDEA, those actions are which
supplier to select, if any.
Event nodes are represented with circles.
Event nodes are points of uncertainty
at which the outcome is random.
For IDEA, that's whether
the market will be weak or strong.
Finally, outcomes
are represented as triangles.
Outcomes are payouts that occur, that are
due to specific sequences of decisions and
events.
For IDEA, the outcomes are its profits.
They depend on which supplier
IDEA chooses, S, P, or none.
And it depends on whether
the market is weak or strong.
Now that we've defined the decision nodes,
the event nodes, and
the outcomes we'll build the tree.
The first thing that we need to do to
build the tree, is include a decision.
With whom will IDEA contract?
If IDEA contracts with no one,
it earns no revenue and pays no costs.
And you can see we have put
a cash flow of zero euros.
And that's the end of
that part of the tree.
The outcome for IDEA in that case,
would be to earn zero euros.
A second possible decision would
be to contract with Supplier S.
If IDEA contracts with Supplier S,
it pays no upfront fixed fee,
so we've written zero euros there.
If IDEA contracts with Supplier P however,
it will pay an upfront fixed
fee of 50,000 euros, and you can see
we've written it on that choice as well.
Those are the three choices that IDEA has.
Now that we have defined
the decision node,
the next thing that happens is an event,
whether the market is weak or strong.
If the market is strong and
IDEA contracts with Supplier S,
that happens with a probability of 0.5.
In that case,
we can calculate the gross profit.
Remember that Supplier S
has 5000 units of capacity.
And a strong market has
10,000 units of demand.
So IDEA would be capacity limited.
It would sell everything that it had
ordered, and it would earn 5,000
units times 150 euros per unit,
but pay unit costs of 120 euros
on all 5,000 units for
a gross profit of 150,000 euros.
That gives us an outcome
of 150 thousand euros.
And we calculated it by
adding the zero upfront cost,
with 150 thousand euros of gross profit.
If on the other hand, the market is weak,
that happens with a probability of 0.05.
And in that case, again,
we can calculate the gross profit.
Remember, if the market's weak,
demand is only 5,000 units.
At the same time, supplier S only
supplies 5,000 units to IDEA.
So again, IDEA earns 150 euros per tent,
times 5,000 tents revenue, and
it pays 120 euros per tent
times 5,000 tents, unit cost to supplier
S for a gross profit of 150,000.
And again, now we can calculate
the profits for IDEA's outcome,
if it orders from supplier S and
the market is weak, it's going to earn
150,000 euros, that's no money upfront and
150,000 euros in gross profit.
Finally, if IDEA contracts with supplier
P, there are again, two outcomes.
One is if the market is strong,
that happens with probability .05.
And here the gross profit is
calculated knowing that demand
is 10,000 units and IDEA has ordered
10,000 units from supplier P.
So the gross profit is 10,000
units times the 150 euro revenue,
minus 10,000 units times the 100 euro unit
cost, for a gross profit of 500,000 euros.
Now that we've got the gross profit, we
can calculate the total profits for idea.
If it orders from supplier P and
the market is strong,
by adding the -50,000 up
front fixed cost with
the 500,000 euro gross profit to
get a net profit of 450,000 euros.
If IDEA orders from supplier P and
the market is weak, that happens
with a probability of .5, and we can
calculate these gross profits as well.
Remember, when IDEA
orders from supplier P,
it orders 10,000 units, but when the
market is weak, it only sells 5,000 units.
So the gross profit is 5,000 units sold,
times 150 Euros per unit,
minus 10,000 units ordered,
times 100 Euros per unit cost,
for a gross profit of
negative 250,000 Euros.
We can finally calculate this
last outcome as -300,000 Euros.
That's the 50,000 Euro up front cost,
fixed cost,
plus the 250,000 euro
negative gross profit.
So that's the entire decision tree.
Before I move on,
I wanna point out two important facts
about the construction of decision trees.
The first is that, to calculate
the profit for IDEA or the outcome,
we always move from the root of the tree
all the way along the branches leading to
an outcome, and add up all of the cash
flows associated with those branches.
You can see for
this bottom branch it's -50,000 euros,
minus 250,000 euros,
gives idea -300,000 euros gross profit.
The second point that I would like to
make is that when we look at event nodes,
we always want to make sure that the sums
of the probabilities add up to one.
As always,
probabilities are always greater than or
equal to zero, and
they ought to add up to one.
Just looking at the finished tree provides
us with some interesting information.
If IDEA contracts with no one,
it earns no revenue or
pays no costs, and
it has a net profit of zero for certain.
If IDEA orders from supplier S,
with a probability of 0.5,
it earns a net profit of 150,000
euros when the market is strong.
And with a probability of 0.5,
it earns a net profit again of
150,000 euros when the market is weak.
So, even though there are two outcomes and
they're random,
both yield the same net profit.
Finally, if IDEA orders from supplier P,
if the market's strong,
IDEA earns a net profit of 450,000 euros,
with probably 0.5, and
with probability 0.5 the market's weak,
and IDEA would lose 300,00 euros.
So you can see that ordering
from supplier P has a chance of
making the most money, but it also
has the chance of the largest loss.
If we compare the outcomes with supplier
S or with ordering from no one,
we can see that both provide sure profits.
Ordering from no one provides
a sure profit of zero,
while ordering from supplier S
provides a sure profit of 150,000.
In that sense, looking at the tree
gives us a sense of the risk
as [INAUDIBLE] had
defined it in week three.
But that's just looking
at a small decision tree.
It turns out that there
are systematic ways of evaluating
the risks of decisions and
the rewards from decisions.
And that's what we're gonna turn to next.
There are three common approaches for
evaluating these options, and
they bound the risk posture
of the decision maker.
First, there's the Maxi-min strategy.
What's that?
That chooses the action always that
maximizes the minimum outcome.
By maximizing the minimum outcome,
the decision maker is minimizing his or
her losses.
So that's a risk adverse strategy.
It avoids bad outcomes.
But notice it doesn't say
anything about good outcomes.
It ignores the possibility
of good outcomes.
At the other end of the spectrum,
there are maxi-max strategies.
Those are actions that
maximize the maximum outcome.
They seek good outcomes, but then again
they completely ignore bad outcomes.
So those are risk seeking or
gain seeking strategies.
In the middle are strategies that maximum
the expected values of the outcomes.
They give equal weight to good and
bad outcomes by calculating the expected
value, and we'll come back to
that calculation in a moment.
There are risk neutral strategies that
lie somewhere in between the natural
extremes of a maxi-min strategy and
maxi-max strategy.
We can use IDEA's decision tree to
determine each of those strategies, and
that's what we're gonna do next.
So first,
we'll start with maxi-min strategies.
And I wanna review for you how we're
going to determine the strategy.
First, remember that maxi-min decisions
maximize the value of the minimum outcome.
We'll start at the tree's outcomes and
work backwards towards it's root.
At each event node, we'll look for
the outcome with the minimum value, and
we'll replace that event node
with that minimum value.
At each decision node,
we'll choose the action that
maximizes the associated values.
So we'll be maximizing
those minimum values.
And we can illustrate that
using IDEA's decision tree.
Here's the decision tree and remember
we're gonna start at the trees outcomes
and work backwards towards its root.
If we look at the outcomes and
start working backwards,
we can see the first set of
things we hit are event notes.
Remember, at each event node we wanna
find the outcome with the minimum value.
We wanna see how bad things can get.
If we look down at the bottom,
we can see when the market is weak or
strong for supplier P.
The worst outcome is when the market is
weak and the idea loses 300,000 euros.
So we'll replace that event
node with the 300,000.
Moving up now to supplier S,
if the market is weak or
the market is strong,
IDEA always earns 150,000 euros.
So, in this case, the minimum and
the maximum value are both 150,000.
Finally, there's nothing to do
if IDEA contracts with no one.
Because we already know
that IDEA makes no money.
The last step of determining the maxi-min
set of decisions is to go and
look at the decision nodes.
Here there's one last decision node, and
we wanna find the action that
maximizes the associated value.
That decision's who to contract with.
And we can see the value maximizing
decision is to contract with supplier s.
So what we'll do is
we'll cut away those two
little red lines that are supposed
to be cuts on branches of the tree,
to indicate that we've chosen contracting
with supplier s as the maxi min strategy.
The next strategy that we'll demonstrate
is the maxi-max set of decisions.
Remember, maxi-max set of decisions
maximize the value of the maximum outcome.
So we want to see how good we can
make the best possible outcome.
To roll back a maxi-max decision tree,
we again start with the tree's outcomes
and work backwards towards its root.
At each event node, we now find
the outcome with the maximum value and
we replace the event node
with that maximum value.
Then at each decision node as before,
we choose the action that
maximizes the associated value.
So let's take a look and
see what happens with IDEAS decision tree.
Again, we start at the tree's outcomes and
we work backwards towards its root.
Starting at the outcomes and
moving to the left,
we see that the first set
of nodes are event nodes.
We'll start at the bottom.
We'll evaluate the decision
to contract with supplier P.
Remember, at this event node,
we going to look for
the outcome with the maximum value.
And for IDEA, that maximum value is
450,000 euros when the market is strong.
So we'll replace that event node.
And now we'll move to supplier S.
Again, in either case,
the outcome is 150,000 euros.
So, by contracting with supplier S,
the maximum value is 150,000 euros.
And finally, we'll move to the decision
node, which is whom to contract with,
and we'll choose the action that
maximizes the associated value.
In this case, you can see
the maximum value is 450,000 euros,
for contracting with supplier P.
And so, we'll eliminate the other two
choices contracting with no one or
contracting with supplier S.
That is, the maxi-max strategy
is to contract the supplier P.
Finally, we're going to determine what
the expected value maximizing strategy is.
We'll start at the tree's outcomes and
work backwards towards its root.
At each event node, we'll now calculate
the expected value of the outcomes, and
we'll replace the event node
with that expected value.
How do we calculate the expected value?
We take each of the outcomes and
we weight it by the estimate of
the probability that it will occur.
At each decision node we'll then
choose the action that maximizes
the associated value.
So let's take a look at how it works for
idea.
Again we'll start at the tree outcomes and
work backwards towards it's root.
The first set of nodes we
see are event nodes, and
first we'll evaluate the event
node associated with supplier P.
And we'll calculate the expected value.
The outcomes are four
hundred fifty thousand, and
negative three hundred thousand.
And we need to weight them by
the probabilities that they occur.
Point five each.
The calculation is that we take
.05*(450,000)+ .05*(-300,000) to
get an expected value of 75,000 for
contracting with supplier p.
Well take that expected value and
substitute it for
the event node and move up to supplier s.
The same calculation for
supplier s has 150,000 for both outcomes.
And it's not hard to see
that when we weight both
outcomes by 0.5 the expected
value is also 150,000.
We'll take that expected value and
replace the event node by it.
And finally we can decide who Idea should
contract with to maximize expected value.
Here you can see the expected
value that highest is 150,000.
That's contracting with supplier S.
And so
we'll eliminate the two other options.
The expected value maximizing strategy for
idea is to contract with supplier S.
So those are the three strategies.
Maximin, maximax, and
expected value maximizing strategies.
The maxi-min strategy was
to chose supplier S, and
it had a maxi-min value of 150,000 Euros.
That is, that was the strategy that would
ensure that the worst that could happen
would be IDEA would earn 150,000 Euros.
The maxi-max strategy
was to chose supplier P,
and it had a maxi-max
value of 450,000 Euros.
The maxi-max strategy ensures
that idea has the chance of
earning up to 450,000 euros.
Finally the risk-neutral strategy
was to choose supplier S.
And again,
it had an expected value of 150,000 euros.
So you can see the maxi-min strategy and
the risk-neutral strategy
have the same value.
That is the expected value
maximizing strategy is also
a very safe strategy because it's
also maximizing the minimum payout.
We've completed the building and
the analysis of the decision tree, and
it's a good point to review the mechanics
of what we do to analyse decision trees.
First we construct a decision tree.
A decision tree has three parts.
It has decision nodes, those are points
at which you make choices among options.
It has event nodes, those are moments in
time when there's a random occurrence.
And finally, there are outcomes.
They capture all the costs and rewards
leading up to each leaf of the tree.
Having built the decision tree,
we just take a look at it.
And looking at the range of outcomes and
the probabilities,
itself can be instructive.
But for a very big tree,
it's useful to have
a more systematic way of taking
a look at the range of possibilities.
And to do that we use three classic
decision making strategies,
to look at risk seeking, risk avoiding and
risk neutral strategies.
For all three of them, we started
at the end with the outcomes, and
worked backwards to the root.
At event notes,
we then calculated either the minimum,
the maximum value or the expected value,
and that differed with the max/min,
max/max, or
expected value maximizing strategy.
And finally,
at decision nodes, we cut away the
decision that did not maximize the value.
This procedure identifies a range of
risk-sensitive strategies from highly risk
avoiding max/min strategies,
to risk-seeking maxi max strategies,
to expected value maximizing strategies
that are somewhere in between.
When using decision trees, it's also
worth keeping the following in mind.
The tree that we constructed in
this session was quite small.
Specifically so
that it all could fit on one screen.
But in real life decision trees
can be very, very large and
have many branches and
layers of decisions and events.
Cash flows in decision trees sometimes
stream in over long periods of time.
Like years, In that case you need to worry
about the discounting of the cash flows.
Where do the cash flows and probabilities
come from in the first place?
Sometimes it comes from past data.
For example, maybe IDEA had sold tents
similar to the Krusbar in previous years.
Sometimes it comes from "expert judgment".
But in either case, these are predictions
about cash flows and probabilities, and
that's a form of "predictive" analytics
that we've touched on already in week one.
You can even do sensitivity
analysis to address shaky data.
For example, we might be interested
in knowing at which probability
we become indifferent between contracting
with supplier S, and supplier P.
Whether than saying what
the probability is,
we find out what
the break-even probability is.
Finally, it's easiest to use a fence
that have just a few discreet scenarios.
That's what we did this time.
There are only two scenarios,
a weak market and a strong market.
But again,
the reality can be more complex.
And that's what we're gonna look
at in session two this week.
Finally, it's worth mentioning that
decision trees are widely used in
practice.
IDEA is just a small example that we've
designed to convey the essential ideas.
But in practise,
decision trees are used to evaluate
a really wide range of complex problems.
And I'm gonna list just a few of them that
you can find published in Interfaces, but
they are many many more out there.
One example would be in research and
development licensing.
For example, there's an interfaces article
on Phytopharm, which was deciding whether
to keep developing its products or
to license them.
Eventually Phytopharm was actually
bought out by another Pxharma company.
Another nice example is credit scoring.
There's an Interfaces article on Bank One,
which was subsequently bought by Chase.
And when people apply for credit cards and
other forms of credit, a common thing
to do is to use decision trees.
Is to figure out, whether to accept
that person or to not accept the person.
Finally, there's a nice article
on the eradication of Polio,
in which the Center for Disease Control in
the United States is using decision trees
to figure out what's the best
course of action is.
There also exists different software
packages to help analyse and
manage large decision trees.
They range from single user products,
such as TreePlan, to massive enterprise
wide products such as those made by
DecisionTools and Logical Decisions.
Problems of decision making under
uncertainty are all around us.
We find them whenever we have to
choose among competing actions, and
our choices lead to uncertain outcomes.
In this session, we look to the simple
one stage decision of which supplier to
select, along with a simple model of
uncertainty in the market outcome.
But decisions made under uncertainty can
have more complex decisions, and outcomes,
and in the next two sessions we'll extend
our analysis to cover these cases.
That's it for week four and
session one, see you at session two.